## PROOF IDEA

We prove this theorem by presenting a polynomial time algorithm that decides PATH. Before describing that algorithm, let’s observe that a brute-force algorithm for this problem isn’t fast enough.

A brute-force algorithm for PATH proceeds by examining all potential paths in G and determining whether any one is a directed path from s to t. A potential path is a sequence of nodes in G having a length of at most m, where m is the numbe rof nodes in G. (If any directed path exists from s to t, one having a length of at most m exists because repeating a node never is necessary.) But the number of such potential paths is roughly $m^m$, which is exponential in the number of nodes in G. Therefore, this brute-force algorithm uses exponential time

To get a polynomial time algorithm for PATH, we must do something that avoids brute force. One way is to use a graph-searching method such as breadth-first search. Here, we successively mark all nodes in G that are reachable from s by directed paths of length 1, then 2, then 3, through m. Bounding the running time of this strategy by a polynomial is easy.

## PROOF

A polynomial time algorithm M for PATH operates as follows.

M = "On input ⟨G,s,t⟩, where G is a directed graph with nodes s and t:

1. Place a mark on node s.
2. Repeat the following until no additional nodes are marked:
3. Scan all the edges of G. If an edge (a,b) is found going from a marked node a to an unmarked node b, mark node b.
4. If t is marked, accept. Otherwise, reject."

Now we analyze this algorithm to show that it runs in polynomial time. Obviously, stages 1 and 4 are executed only once. Stage 3 runs at most m times because each time except the last it marks an additional node in G. Thus, the total number of stages used is at most (1 + 1 + m), giving a polynomial in the sizeof G.

Stages 1 and 4 of M are easily implemented in polynomial time on any reasonable deterministic model. Stage 3 involves a scan of the input and a test of whether certain nodes are marked, which also is easily implemented in polynomial time. Hence M is a polynomial time algorithm for PATH.
